KEP-4832: Asynchronous preemption in the scheduler (#4833)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-scheduling/4832-async-preemption/README.md

But, we have the similar problem with the preemption; the preemption is run at PostFilter extension point which is the part of the scheduling cycle.
The preemption has to make some API calls to update Pods' condition and delete Pods after all, which could block the scheduling throughput.

scheduler-perf [actually shows](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/342da505bdefbd849b808cca3cb76c24a993025f/test/integration/scheduler_perf/config/performance-config.yaml#L641) currently the preemption scenario takes too long time, compared to others.

### Goals

- Improve scheduling throughput when pods require issuing preemptions by making API calls asynchronous

### Non-Goals

- Making the same enhancement for DRA is not a goal of this KEP because it's an under-construction feature yet.
  - If DRA maintainers want, technically they can along with this KEP. But, at least in this KEP, we don't discuss how.

## Proposal

The preemption plugin makes API calls for the preemption asynchronously after `PostFilter` extension point 
so that the scheduler can continue to other Pods' scheduling while making API calls for preemption.

> After the preemption goroutine is done, the scheduling for the Pod that triggered the preemption will be retried.

Reviewer: Does this mean that the DefaultPreemption plugin will be executed outside of PostFilter?
In that case, we may want to add a dedicated extension point.

But, we may be able to consider it as another enhancement or Beta or GA criteria. 
@sanposhiho WDYT?

Reviewer 2: That was the first proposal and I suggested that we keep it internal to the preemption plugin because we don't know of other use cases yet.

Having it as part of the framework can be more maintenance effort.

Reviewer: > Having it as part of the framework can be more maintenance effort.

Good point. I'm also thinking too. My primary motivation was keeping consistency in the scheduling cycle.
As far as I know, during the scheduling cycle, the scheduling order is guaranteed (not parallel), and the binding cycle could be parallel.

Since this feature, even though it is part of the scheduling cycle, the order of scheduling will not be guaranteed, right?

But, this is still the alpha stage. So, we may be able to revisit here when we find more clear concerns and use cases.

Reviewer 2: Scheduling order has never been guaranteed in kube-scheduler.

Preemption is already highly asynchronous, given that we have to wait for the pods to actually finish. So this is not a major departure.

Reviewer: Yeah, that's true. The order depends on the triggered event,  requeuing and repoped timing and so on. I just wanted to say that the current behavior guarantees one by one scheduling during scheduling cycle.

Reviewer: > Preemption is already highly asynchronous, given that we have to wait for the pods to actually finish. So this is not a major departure.

That makes sense. We may be able to consider this feature as a non completely fresh feature since the Preemption already depends on the API call during cycle. This is just improve the Preemption performance.

But, that is a just trivial word play. Thanks for the clarifications.

Author: Yeah, so I put the idea of a new extension in the alternative section for now, and we can iterate back when we find it necessary actually. For now, as Aldo suggested, I prefer just doing it with all existing scheduler features.

Reviewer: That makes sense. Thanks!

Reviewer 3: Is it possible that two asynchronous preemption go routines end up being executed in the reversed order in the scenario where a higher priority pod2 is assigned to the same node than pod1 is already preemting?

It's clear that the scheduler cache will be always consistent (pod2 will be the nominated one), but in go routines pod1 may theoretically win and override pod2 in the status.nominatedNodeName. Is there a mechanism that would prevent that?

Author: As described in "The pod2's scheduling is failed and starts the preemption (pod2 is higher priority than pod1)", it wouldn't be an issue, right? The order of goroutine finishes doesn't matter.
Or, are you talking about another scenario?

Reviewer 3: > The order of goroutine finishes doesn't matter.

Yes, I'm talking about this scenario. It's clear that the scheduler cache will be consistent, but I'm thinking just about the asynchronous go routines. Is pod1 go routine canceled when pod2 takes pod1's place?

If not, isn't it possible that go routine for pod2 finish earlier (sets `status.nominatedNodeName` in apiserver), but pod1 routine finishes later and overrides it incorrectly with pod1? It's probably quite unlikely scenario and the consequences might not be big either, but it still might be possible, if pod1 go routine is not cancelled or at least informed that it should abandon setting `status.nominatedNodeName`.

Reviewer 3: Ah, ignore my comment. The nominated node is written into two different pods, not into a node.

the scheduler could make a non-optimal scheduling decision 
because the scheduler nominates pods at `PostFilter` though, those Pods won't be scheduled on nodes because the preemption API calls fail.

Let's say many mid-priority Pods are making the preemption API calls.
With the scheduler after this proposal, during the preemption goroutine for them are runnning, 
the scheduler assumes they'll be scheduled at the Nodes eventually
that the preemptions are targeting via `.Status.NominatedNodeName`.
So, other mid-priority or lower priority Pods' scheduling take those preemptor Pods into consideration, 
which is correct if the preemption goroutine finishes successful actually, while which results in non-best scheduling results otherwise.
(Higher priority Pods won't be affected; Pods can take place of reserved for lower priority Pods via `.Status.NominatedNodeName`)

But, in the first place though, when kube-apiserver is unstable, the scheduler doesn't behave well 
because it works with a lot of communication with kube-apiserver.
Even if the scheduler makes the best scheduling result, the binding API might fail after all.

> So, we don't have to pay a special attention to this issue.

Reviewer 4: I don't fully agree with this. We have to pay attention to it, but it's orthogonal to this KEP.

Author: How would you change the sentence? (From my non-native-speaker eyes, `a "special" attention` delivers the nuance.)

#### The pod2's scheduling is failed and starts the preemption (pod2 is higher priority than pod1)

The pod2's preemption ignores pod1's nomination for node1.

If, coincidently, two preemptions for pod1 and pod2 select the same Node after all, 
then the preemption for pod2 may just select the same preemption targets as pod1,
and when pod1 comes back to the scheduling cycle, it (probably) cannot be scheduled on node1 because of pod2.

But, this isn't an issue because the final result is completely the same as the current scheduler;
with the current scheduler, pod1 preempts some Pods on node1, then pod2's scheduling starts, pod2 takes node1, 
and when pod1 comes back to the scheduling cycle, it (probably) cannot be scheduled on node1 because of pod2.

### Test Plan

[x] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

##### Unit tests

- `/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/defaultpreemption/default_preemption.go`: `2024-09-07` - `85.4`

> - `/pkg/scheduler/framework/preemption/preemption.go`: `2024-09-07` - `27.2`

Reviewer 4: This seems fairly low. Can we increase the test coverage there first, before making changes for this KEP?

##### e2e tests

We'll add test cases that multiple pods are trigger preemption.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature flag
- All tests mentioned in [Test Plan](#test-plan) are implemented.

#### Beta

- Gather feedback from users and fix reported bugs.
- Change the feature flag to be enabled by default.

#### GA

- Gather feedback from users and fix reported bugs.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

**Upgrade**

During the alpha period, users have to enable the feature gate `SchedulerAsyncPreemption` to opt in this feature.
This is purely internal feature for kube-scheduler, so no other special actions are required outside the scheduler.

**Downgrade**

Users need to disable the feature gate.

### Version Skew Strategy

This is purely internal feature for kube-scheduler, and hence no version skew strategy.

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: `SchedulerAsyncPreemption`

>   - Components depending on the feature gate:

Reviewer 4: Fill in (kube-scheduler)

No. 
But, like mentioned in [When kube-apiserver is unstable](#when-kube-apiserver-is-unstable), scheduling results could be different.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

Yes.
The feature can be disabled in Alpha and Beta versions
by restarting kube-scheduler with the feature-gate off.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

The scheduler again starts to run PostFilter asynchronously.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

Given it's purely internal feature and enablement/disablement requires restarting the component (to change the value of feature flag), 
having feature tests is enough.

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

The partly failure in the rollout isn't there because the scheduler is only the component to rollout this feature. 
But, if upgrading the scheduler itself fails somehow, new Pods won't be scheduled anymore. 

> (while Pods, which are already scheduled, won't be affected in any cases.)

Reviewer 4: One can imagine a bug that we start preempting the wrong pods. So in fact running worklods can in theory be affected here (in case of bugs).

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

> Maybe something goes wrong with the preemption if `goroutines_duration_seconds{operation=preemption}` takes too long time.

Reviewer 4: Not sure that's the best metric too look at.
Shouldn't we rather try to look at number of preemptions?

Author: I'll additionally mention `preemption_attempts_total` too here. 
I still believe `goroutines_duration_seconds` is also worthwhile to possibly catch some failures.

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

> No. This feature is an internal feature of the scheduler, 

Reviewer 4: nit: it's not about the fact that it's internal, but rather that it "in-memory" (with no persistent state)

and just upgrading it and upgrade->downgrade->upgrade are both the same.

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

No.

### Monitoring Requirements

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

This feature is used during all Pods' preemption if the feature gate is enabled.

> You can find Pods that have experienced the preemption by referring to `.Status.NominatedNodeName`.

Reviewer 4: Those are the ones that cause preemption for other pods.
How about the victims?

to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

##### Unit tests

- `/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/defaultpreemption/default_preemption.go`: `2024-09-07` - `85.4`
- `/pkg/scheduler/framework/preemption/preemption.go`: `2024-09-07` - `27.2`

Because the coverage for preemption.go is pretty low, we have to improve the testing there before the change for this KEP.

##### Integration tests

We have to add integration tests to make sure the asynchronous preemption is performed appropriately, 
especially in the scenarios listed in [Consideration to race condition](#consideration-to-race-condition).

##### e2e tests

We'll add test cases that multiple pods are trigger preemption.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature flag
- All tests mentioned in [Test Plan](#test-plan) are implemented.

#### Beta

- Gather feedback from users and fix reported bugs.
- Change the feature flag to be enabled by default.

#### GA

- Gather feedback from users and fix reported bugs.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

**Upgrade**

During the alpha period, users have to enable the feature gate `SchedulerAsyncPreemption` to opt in this feature.

> This is purely internal feature for kube-scheduler, so no other special actions are required outside the scheduler.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is purely in-memory feature for kube-scheduler, so no other special actions are required outside the scheduler.
```

**Downgrade**

Users need to disable the feature gate.

### Version Skew Strategy

> This is purely internal feature for kube-scheduler, and hence no version skew strategy.

Reviewer 2: same

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: `SchedulerAsyncPreemption`
  - Components depending on the feature gate: kube-scheduler
- [ ] Other
  - Describe the mechanism:
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime of the control
    plane?
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning
    of a node?

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

> No. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
No. The feature is a performance optimization that affects every Pod that needs preemption, but there are no functional changes: the result of the preemption is the same.
```

But, like mentioned in [When kube-apiserver is unstable](#when-kube-apiserver-is-unstable), scheduling results could be different.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

Yes.
The feature can be disabled in Alpha and Beta versions
by restarting kube-scheduler with the feature-gate off.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

The scheduler again starts to run PostFilter asynchronously.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

> Given it's purely internal feature and enablement/disablement requires restarting the component (to change the value of feature flag), 

Reviewer 2: in-memory

-->

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

The partly failure in the rollout isn't there because the scheduler is only the component to rollout this feature. 
But, if upgrading the scheduler itself fails somehow, new Pods won't be scheduled anymore. 
If there's a bug in the preemption because of this enhancement, and also downgrading the scheduler fails somehow,
running Pods could be affected, for example, by being deleted by mistake (depending on bugs).

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

Maybe something goes wrong with the preemption if `goroutines_duration_seconds{operation=preemption}` takes too long time.
Also, if `preemption_attempts_total` increases too much, then that might also imply some bugs around the preemption.

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

No. This feature is an in-memory feature of the scheduler, 
and just upgrading it and upgrade->downgrade->upgrade are both the same.

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

No.

### Monitoring Requirements

> ###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

Reviewer 2: Also by looking at `preemption_attempts_total`

and Pods that have been preempted by referring to their condition with `type: DisruptionTarget` and `reason: PreemptionByScheduler`.

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

- [x] API .status
  - Other field: If `.Status.NominatedNodeName` of Pods is non-empty, they have experienced the preemption running asynchronously.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

- The failure rate of the preemption goroutine (`goroutines_execution_total{result=error, operation=preemption}`/`goroutines_execution_total{operation=preemption}`) should be < 0.01.

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

- [x] Metrics
  - Metric name: `goroutines_execution_total{result=error, operation=preemption}` 
  - Components exposing the metric: kube-scheduler

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

- `goroutines_duration_seconds` (w/ label: `operation`): to observe how many preemption goroutines have failed.

> - `goroutines_execution_total` (w/ labels: `operation`, `result`): to observe how long each preemption goroutine takes to complete.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what is the difference between the two. Can you review?

Author: Oops. Sorry, the explanation was the opposite.

Let's say many mid-priority Pods are making the preemption API calls.
With the scheduler after this proposal, during the preemption goroutine for them are runnning, 
the scheduler assumes they'll be scheduled at the Nodes eventually
that the preemptions are targeting via `.Status.NominatedNodeName`.
So, other mid-priority or lower priority Pods' scheduling take those preemptor Pods into consideration, 
which is correct if the preemption goroutine finishes successful actually, while which results in non-best scheduling results otherwise.
(Higher priority Pods won't be affected; Pods can take place of reserved for lower priority Pods via `.Status.NominatedNodeName`)

But, in the first place though, when kube-apiserver is unstable, the scheduler doesn't behave well 
because it works with a lot of communication with kube-apiserver.
Even if the scheduler makes the best scheduling result, the binding API might fail after all.

So, we don't have to pay a special attention to this issue.

## Design Details

To achieve an asynchronous preemption, we will change the preemption plugin's implementation like the following:

> 1. The preemption PostFilter plugin calculates the preemption target and nominate the Pod for the Node. (We'll use `AddNominatedPod` API exposed from the scheduling framework to plugins.)

Reviewer 5: What will happen once we restart the scheduler, we'll loss the whole nominator.

Author: For the Pods that have completed the preemption API calls completely, they have `.status.nominatedNodeName` 
and hence wouldn't be affected by the restart.

But, regarding the Pods that are in-progress of making API calls, the nomination info for them would be lost,
and the deletion of victim Pods are, of course, stopped in the middle.
After the restart, such Pods would be rescheduled;
the deletion of victims by the preemptions before the restart will likely be helpful in making them schedulable. 
And also, some of them will likely have to trigger the preemption again though, 
those Pods are likely to pick up the same node as the preemption target 
especially because those nodes lost some running Pods already because of the previous preemption(s). 
(unless there's a lot of change in the cluster during the restart, which should be a short duration).

Yes, a lot of assumption ("likely") in this explanation though, given the restart is not often, we believe we can ignore it.

Reviewer 5: Thanks for the explanation.

2. The preemption PostFilter plugin starts the goroutine to make API calls inside, and return success status (= not wait for the goroutine to finish).

> 3. The preemption plugin blocks the Pod while the preemption routine is in-progress, using PreEnqueue extension point, so that the target Pod won't be retried during this time.

Author: Yes, those Pods would be gated, like mentioned in-

> using PreEnqueue extension point

> 3. The preemption plugin blocks the Pod while the preemption routine is in-progress, using PreEnqueue extension point, so that the target Pod won't be retried during this time.

Reviewer 5: If this is another api call then my concern would be we should not introduce more api calls in scheduling cycle and actually our original intension was try to avoid API calls to block the process.

> 3. The preemption plugin blocks the Pod while the preemption routine is in-progress, using PreEnqueue extension point, so that the target Pod won't be retried during this time.

Author: Oops. Sorry, my answer is vague.

I said Yes to
> Do you mean gated the Pod?

The answer for ↓ is No.
> Is this another api call?

So, it's just gated at PreEnqueue extension point, not making a new API call.

> 3. The preemption plugin blocks the Pod while the preemption routine is in-progress, using PreEnqueue extension point, so that the target Pod won't be retried during this time.

Reviewer 5: bingo

> Then, afterwards the preemption goroutine makes actual API calls to delete victime Pods and set `Pod.Status.NominatedNodeName`. 

Author: Will change the explanation here a bit (but, don't want to explain a lot on KEP because it's an implementation detail)

So, it'll be like:
1. the preemption plugin has a map or something to record which unsched Pod is making the preemption API calls in goroutine. 
2. While making the API calls in goroutine, the Pod is gated so that it won't be requeued to activeQ/backoffQ.
3. When finishing the goroutine, the preemption plugin no longer gate this Pod.
4. Pod/delete event comes because of the preemption, triggering the Pod requeueing.

> Then, afterwards the preemption goroutine makes actual API calls to delete victime Pods and set `Pod.Status.NominatedNodeName`. 

Reviewer 5: Step3 is what I'm lost, it's a async programming, how to know that we finished the evictions.

> Then, afterwards the preemption goroutine makes actual API calls to delete victime Pods and set `Pod.Status.NominatedNodeName`. 

Reviewer 5: Ok, we may get more details in the implementation.

> Then, afterwards the preemption goroutine makes actual API calls to delete victime Pods and set `Pod.Status.NominatedNodeName`. 

Reviewer 2: Another implementation detail: will the pod be considered "inflight" (for the hints feature) while the routine is running? I think it doesn't have to be.

> Then, afterwards the preemption goroutine makes actual API calls to delete victime Pods and set `Pod.Status.NominatedNodeName`. 

Author: Yes, they don't have to. Rather they should just ignore all events (by being blocked at preemption plugin's PreEnqueue) while the preemption routine is running.

Then, when pod1 comes back to the scheduling cycle, it may not be able to land on node1 because pod2 is scheduled there now.
It happens with both the current and this KEP's scheduler, so no issue here.

#### The pod2's scheduling is failed and starts the preemption (pod2 is equal or lower priority than pod1)

The preemption also takes nominated Pods into consideration when calculating the preemption target.

Therefore, if, coincidently, two preemptions for pod1 and pod2 select the same Node after all, 
then the preemption for pod2 should decide to make the space for pod1 and pod2.

So, we don't have to worry about two preemption targeting the same Node make any issue.

#### The pod2's scheduling is failed and starts the preemption (pod2 is higher priority than pod1)

The pod2's preemption ignores pod1's nomination for node1.

If, coincidently, two preemptions for pod1 and pod2 select the same Node after all, 
then the preemption for pod2 may just select the same preemption targets as pod1,
and when pod1 comes back to the scheduling cycle, it (probably) cannot be scheduled on node1 because of pod2.

> But, this isn't an issue because the final result is completely the same as the current scheduler;

Reviewer 5: This is different, because with this design, we'll delete the Pods async, during that time window, we may start the next scheduling cycle and snapshot the cluster, in a small cluster, this may race more often.

Author: So, here explains that it's the same result eventually even when the pod deletion isn't done by the start of next scheduling cycle, right? Is this explanation missing some edge cases?

Reviewer 5: Yes, eventually we will get the same result. What I want to highlight is once two preemptions would like to delete the same victims (because of the async eviction), it will lead to a waste of **One** scheduling cycle and useless evictions. I think it's serious.

Author: So, did you want to argue the first scheduling cycle for pod2 is a waste, compared to the current scheduler, because if we wait for pod1's preemption to be done before pod2's scheduling, pod2 can go to the node straight away?

I'm not sure if it makes a serious performance difference, or could happen seriously-frequently (unless, again, I'm not missing anything).
Here's a detailed explanation (long story warning!!! as usual 😅)

The scenario that we're talking here is:
- the cluster is super packed.
- pod1's priority < pod2's priority.
- pod1 cannot find the place and triggers the preemption.
- pod2 comes after pod1, pod2 cannot find the place without any pod deletion.

And, the current scheduler behaves:
1. pod1 triggers the preemption.
2. The scheduler just waits for (1) to be done. (Note that, at this point, the victim Pods just have deletionTimestamp, not truly deleted)
3. If victim Pods are truly deleted before the scheduling cycle start, pod2's scheduling cycle starts and pod2 can go straight to node1 where pod1 makes a space with the preemption. If not, pod2 cannot find the place and goes back to the queue.

The proposed scheduler behaves:
1. pod1 triggers the preemption.
2. pod2's scheduling cycle starts without waiting for (1) to be done. And the scheduler finds that pod2 cannot go anywhere.
3. pod2 triggers the preemption and (let's say) selects the same node as pod1.

First, as written at `the current scheduler`'s third step,
note that, if not, pod2's scheduling cycle is wasted, which is completely the same as the proposed scheduler. 
_So, even the current scheduler could waste one scheduling cycle, in the first place._ 
Rather, actually, given it usually takes some time for Pods to be truly deleted, it's more likely to waste, than not to waste.

But, okay, let's consider what would happen in case the current scheduler doesn't waste; meaning all victim Pods are truly deleted luckily before the pod2's scheduling cycle start.
In this case, let's say API calls for the preemption take 1 second to be all done.
Then, the time that the scheduler takes to schedule pod2 finally is `1 second + the victim Pods are all truly deleted + the time for one scheduling cycle`.
Given "the time for one scheduling cycle" is very small, we can roughly say it's `1 second + the victim Pods are all truly deleted`.

Then, when it comes to the proposed scheduler, it'll be `1 second + max{(the victim Pods are all truly deleted), (the backoff time for pod2)} + the time for _two_ scheduling cycles.`
Given, again "the time for one scheduling cycle" is very small, we can roughly say it's 1` second + max{(the victim Pods are all truly deleted), (the backoff time for pod2)}`.

So, as a result, a rough time comparison between two schedulers would be:
- The current scheduler: `1 second + the victim Pods are all truly deleted` 
- The new scheduler: `1 second + max{(the victim Pods are all truly deleted), (the backoff time for pod2)}`.

So, if (the victim Pods are all truly deleted) > (the backoff time for pod2), then no time difference.
Also, I believe the time difference would be small, even if there is.

To summarize, if you want to observe the current scheduler is faster for pod2 than the proposed scheduler, all the following conditions have to be met:
General condition:
- the cluster is super packed.
- pod1 cannot find the place and triggers the preemption.
- pod2 comes after pod1, pod2 cannot find the place too without any pod deletion.

The current scheduler:
- pod2 has to come to the activeQ before pod1 starts a second scheduling cycle, but after all victim Pods (deleted by pod1's preemption) are truly deleted.

The proposed scheduler:
- pod2 selects the same node as pod1 in its preemption.
- pod2's backoff time is longer than the time for the victim Pods to all truly deleted.

When you're so fortunate that all the conditions are met, you can finally see the performance degradation and the difference is `(the backoff time for pod2) - (the victim Pods are all truly deleted)`, which should be not that big difference.

Author: Okay, looking back at my reply just made, I found my reply too long. 
So, in very short, I guess you missed that, even with the current scheduler, the Pods aren't truly deleted after the preemption (because the preemption just puts the deletionTimestamp on victim Pods). 

- It could likely make a one wasted scheduling cycle for pod2 in the current scheduler, like the proposed scheduler.
- Even if it doesn't make luckily, the time difference made by the wasted scheduling cycle in the proposed scheduler would be likely small.

Yes, there's, again, many assumptions ("likely") though, in the first place, this scenario that we're talking itself is also not something that very frequently happens in many clusters.

Reviewer 5: Thanks Kensei, it's a long typing. With the consideration of the maturity of Kubernetes today, I believe stability is more important than new features, so I'm more concerned about what side effects would  be introduced into the kubernetes. What I mentioned above is one side, as the same victim would be chosen for two different preemptions, another one is the nominator info would be stale in the cache, for example the eviction API calls are failed, both of them may lead to chaos (I hope I worried too much)

However, I think there's no reason to block this goes into the alpha stage, and Aldo already LGTMed, but when graduating to Beta, I hope we can take these risks into consideration, so LGTM as well.
/lgtm

Author: > the same victim would be chosen for two different preemptions

I do not consider it as a risk both from a functional perspective and a performance perspective
as the KEP and my above too-long comment explain it's safe even if two goroutines select the same Pod(s) as a preemption victim.

> another one is the nominator info would be stale in the cache, for example the eviction API calls are failed

Yes, it is a risk in case kube-apiserver (or network etc) is unstable and the API call fails. And, we already mentioned it in the risk section.

Reviewer 5: I wouldn't argue more on this since we're all aware of the case but if you're evicting a bunch of Pods however this wouldn't make the preemptor Pod schedulable, or even worse make the cluster less balance, I would take it a risk. We do have similar situations right now (we do not guarantee the preemptor pod will be schedulable again), but we're exacerbating this.

2. At the end of the scheduling cycle, the scheduler reserves the Node within the scheduler's cache so that next scheduling cycle will take the current pod into consideration.
3. The scheduling cycle ends and the binding cycle starts; the binding cycle is run asynchronously, and the scheduler starts the next scheduling cycle.

This flow allows us to decouple the API call to assign Pod to the Node from the scheduling cycle so that the API call doesn't block the scheduling throughput.

But, we have the similar problem with the preemption; the preemption is run at PostFilter extension point which is the part of the scheduling cycle.
The preemption has to make some API calls to update Pods' condition and delete Pods after all, which could block the scheduling throughput.

scheduler-perf [actually shows](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/342da505bdefbd849b808cca3cb76c24a993025f/test/integration/scheduler_perf/config/performance-config.yaml#L641) currently the preemption scenario takes too long time, compared to others.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

> - The preemption plugin makes API calls for the preemption asynchronously after `PostFilter` extension point so that the scheduler can continue to other Pods' scheduling while making API calls for preemption.
>   - Until the preemption goroutine is done, the Pod won't be rescheduled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Improve scheduling throughput when pods require issuing preemptions by making API calls asynchronous
```

The goal shouldn't describe the solution.

Reviewer 2: > Until the preemption goroutine is done, the Pod won't be rescheduled.

Actually, that should not necessarily be true. If other pods finish while preemptions are being issued, maybe the pod could just go through. We could even stop the preemptions at that point, if possible.

Reviewer 2: I think this is important. The preemptor pod doesn't know how long it will take for a preempted Pod to terminate. It can be tens of minutes (yes, I've seen customers do this).

The preemptor pod should be scheduled ASAP, as it has a high priority. It could even go to a node that it didn't nominate (it can today).

Author: > It can be tens of minutes

We should recommend not making such Pods lower-prioritized that could be picked up as the victims of the preemption, right? 
Regardless of whether we go with the change you're proposing here or not, selecting such pods as the preemption victims is mostly not worthwhile for scheduling; the scheduler shouldn't select those Pods in the first place.

Also, I believe no one doesn't do it currently (rather no one can do it) because if users do so with the current scheduler, the scheduler would completely stop for tens of minutes.
What do you think

Reviewer 2: > Also, I believe no one doesn't do it currently (rather no one can do it) because if users do so with the current scheduler, the scheduler would completely stop for tens of minutes.

No, because the grace period happens after kube-scheduler has issued the DELETE API call, which is immediate.

>  Until the preemption goroutine is done, the Pod won't be rescheduled.

Although, you are only limiting this to the preemption routine, not the Pods' grace period. Re-thinking about it, that's actually similar to what we have today. Ok, if necessary, we can always adjust as we prepare for beta.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

- Making the same enhancement for DRA is not a goal of this KEP because it's an under-construction feature yet.
  - If DRA maintainers want, technically they can along with this KEP. But, at least in this KEP, we don't discuss how.

## Proposal

> <!--

Reviewer 2: You can move what you wrote in the goals here, and possibly expand.

This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

> #### Story 1

Reviewer 2: This story doesn't seem to match the proposal anymore

Author: Will just remove the story part as we only focus on optimizing our preemption, not like creating a new extension point, which could have multiple user stories.

We have a plugin running the preemption at PostFilter,
but we don't want to make any API calls at PostFilter because it slows down the whole scheduling throughput.

After this KEP is implemented, we determine which Pod(s) to preempt at `PostFilter`,
nominate the Pod based on the calculation,
and actually makes the API calls in the goroutine.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

#### When kube-apiserver is unstable

When kube-apiserver is unstable and API calls at the preemption goroutine fails frequently,

> the scheduler could make a non-best scheduling result 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the scheduler could make a non-optimal scheduling decision
```

because the scheduler nominates pods at `PostFilter` though, those Pods won't be scheduled on nodes because the preemption API calls fail.

Let's say many mid-priority Pods are making the preemption API calls.

> During the preemption goroutine for them are runnning, the scheduler assumes they'll be scheduled at the Nodes eventually

Reviewer 2: is this a change or the current behavior?

Author: It's the scheduler after this proposal. 
Will clearly mention it.

that the preemptions are targeting via `.Status.NominatedNodeName`.

> So, other mid-priority or lower priority Pods' scheduling take those preempter Pods into consideration, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So, other mid-priority or lower priority Pods' scheduling take those preemptor Pods into consideration, 
```
?

which is correct if the preemption goroutine finishes successful actually, while which results in non-best scheduling results.
(Higher priority Pods won't be affected; Pods can take place of reserved for lower priority Pods via `.Status.NominatedNodeName`)

But, in the first place though, when kube-apiserver is unstable, the scheduler doesn't behave well 
because it works with a lot of communication with kube-apiserver.
Even if the scheduler makes the best scheduling result, the binding API might fail after all.

So, we don't have to pay a special attention to this issue.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

To achieve an asynchronous preemption, we will change the preemption plugin's implementation like the following:

> 1. The preemption PostFilter plugin calculates the preemption target and nominate the Pod for the Node. (We'll use `AddNominatedPod` API exposed from the scheduling framework to plugins.)

Reviewer 2: this is just an in-memory operation, right?

What about the API call to set the nominatedNodeName?

Author: API call to set the nominated node name will be done within the preemption goroutine after all victim Pods are deleted successfully. Will mention it.

2. The preemption PostFilter plugin starts the goroutine to make API calls inside, and return success status (= not wait for the goroutine to finish).

> 3. The preemption plugin gates the Pod, which the preemption is in-progress, at PreEnqueue extension point so that the target Pod won't be retried during the preemption.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should do this. The pod should be able to compete for spaced freed by other pods that it didn't preempt.

Author: Let's discuss this topic in this thread -
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4833#discussion_r1782440928

Reviewer 2: Because others might not see the other thread. I'm not in favor of this KEP with this restriction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. The preemption plugin blocks the Pod while the preemption routine is in-progress, using PreEnqueue extension point, so that the target Pod won't be retried during this time.
```

And add a sentence to indicate why we do this.

Here, I'll discuss what happens in which scenario, and make sure there's no worry.

Let's say pod1 is during the preemption process (node1) at the preemption goroutine, the next scheduling cycle is scheduling pod2. 

#### The pod2's scheduling is successful (pod2 is equal or lower priority than pod1)

As I described above, pod1's `PostFilter` nominates pod1 for node1.

At the scheduling cycle, the scheduler takes such nominated pods that are equal or higher priority than pod1 into consideration;
meaning, pod2 won't rob pod1 of the place on node1.

#### The pod2's scheduling is successful (pod2 is higher priority than pod1)

Even though pod1 is nominated for the node, the scheduler allows pod2 to take node1, where the pod1's preemption made the space. 

Then, when pod1 comes back to the scheduling cycle, it may not be able to land on node1 because pod2 is scheduled there now.
It happens with both the current and this KEP's scheduler, so no issue here.

#### The pod2's scheduling is failed and starts the preemption (pod2 is equal or lower priority than pod1)

The preemption also takes nominated Pods into consideration when calculating the preemption target.

> Therefore, if, coincidently, two preemptions for pod1 and pod2 select the same Node after all, 

Reviewer 2: Could pod2 issue preemptions for pods that are already preempted or being preempted in a routine?

I found this comment https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/851cf43a35862aeeafc4a0966f7d1e0836f675e4/pkg/scheduler/framework/runtime/framework.go#L969-L972, but I'm not sure where the implementation of that is (removing victims)

Author: > Could pod2 issue preemptions for pods that are already preempted or being preempted in a routine?

Yes. So, when we delete Pods, we have to ignore not-found errors from the API.

So, let's say node1 has `victim-pod1` - `victim-pod4` with priority 1 - 4 (correspondingly), and each of them requires two CPUs.
Let's say `preemptor-pod1` and `preemptor-pod2` have the same priority that is higher than all Pods on node1, and both of them require 4 CPUs.
In this case, what is supposed to happen is that
1. `preemptor-pod1` selects `victim-pod1` and `victim-pod2` for the preemption victims because they have lower priorities than other Pods on node1.
2. (let's say the preemption API calls for pod1 haven't finished at all yet) `preemptor-pod2` selects `victim-pod1`, `victim-pod2`, `victim-pod3` and `victim-pod4` for the preemption target.
This is because, during the target calculation, the scheduler assumes `preemptor-pod1` is already on the node1; meaning, node1 has more Pods than its actual capacity. So, if `preemptor-pod2` selects node1 for the preemption, it has to delete enough Pods to make 8 CPUs.

---

> I found this comment

I think... the comment is invalid? I couldn't find such implementation either.
So, I guess actually, for the same reason described above, the current implementation goes without any issue, without deleting victims in `SelectVictimsOnNode`.

Reviewer 2: Ok, so `preemptor-pod2` would still choose `victim-pod1` and `victim-pod2`. That is fine, however, we could save API calls if these pods already have a `deletionTimestamp`. This is an implementation detail, but please keep it in mind.
